Adding PID controller Chapter. (#346)
algorithm-archivists/algorithm-archive: contents/pid_controller/pid_controller.md

### Proportional Controller

Imagine our RC car is too far to the right of the line, in this case it makes sense to turn left.
Since there are a range of angles you can turn the wheel, you should turn proportional to the distance from the line.
This is what the proportional controller (P controller) does, which is described by

$$ P = K_{p} e(t), $$

Where $K_{p}$ is a constant and $e(t)$ is the current distance from the line, which is called the error.
The performance of the controller improves with larger $K_{p}$;
if $K_{p}$ is too high then when the error is too high, the system becomes unstable.
In this example, the car would turn in circles, since there is a maximum angle the wheel can turn, else it would zig zag around the line.

<div style="text-align:center">
<video width="500" height="500" autoplay controls loop>
  <source src="res/circling.mp4" type="video/mp4">
Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>

### Derivative Controller

The P controller works well but it has the added problem of overshooting, we need to dampen this motion.

> One way to solve this is to make the rc car resistant to sudden changes of error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way to do this is to make the RC car resistant to sudden changes of error.
```

This is what the derivative controller (D controller) does, which is described by

$$ D = K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt}$$

> Where $K_{d}$ is a constant.
> If $K_{d}$ is too high then the system is overdamped, i.e. the car takes too long to get back on track.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where $$K_{d}$$ is a constant.
If $$K_{d}$$ is too high then the system is overdamped, i.e. the car takes too long to get back on track.
```

> If it's too low the system is underdamped, i.e. the car oscillates around the line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it's too low, the system is underdamped, i.e. the car oscillates around the line.
```

When the car returns to the track and there is little to no oscillations, the system is critically damped.

<div style="text-align:center">
<video width="500" height="500" autoplay controls loop>
  <source src="res/damping.mp4" type="video/mp4">
Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>

### Integral Controller

> The Proportional and Derivative controllers are robust enough to keep on course, but what if some wind starts pushing the car constantly of track?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Proportional and Derivative controllers are robust enough to keep the RC car on course, but what if some wind or other external force starts pushing the car constantly off track?
```

> Well, we would need to know if we are spending too long on one side to account for it, and we can figure it out by summing up all the displacements, usually refered to as errors, and multiply it by a constant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well, we would need to know if we are spending too long on one side to account for this, and we can figure that out by taking a sum of all the displacements, usually referred to as errors, and multiplying by a constant.
```

Sorry, I just didn't know what "it" was exactly.

This is what the integral controller (I controller) does, which is described by

> $$ I = K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(\uptau) d\uptau, $$

Reviewer: `\uptau` doesn't seem to exist in mathjax, can we use `tau`?

Where $K_{i}$ is a constant.
The peformance of the controller is better with higher $K_{i}$; but with higher $K_{i}$ it can introduce oscillations.

### Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller

The PID controller is just a sum of all three controllers and is of the form

$$ U = K_{p} e(t) + K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(x) dx + K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt} $$

> To use a PID controller, you need to tune it by setting the constants, $K_{p}$, $K_{i}$, and $K_{d}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a PID controller, you need to tune it by setting the constants, $$K_{p}$$, $$K_{i}$$, and $$K_{d}$$.
```

If you choose the parameters for your PID controller incorrectly, the output will be unstable, i.e., the output diverges.

> There are multiple methods of tuning like, manual tuning, Ziegler–Nichols, Tyreus Luyben, Cohen–Coon, and Åström-Hägglund.{{ "wikipid" | cite }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple methods of tuning like manual tuning, Ziegler–Nichols, Tyreus Luyben, Cohen–Coon, and Åström-Hägglund.{{ "wikipid" | cite }}
``

Theoretically, PID controllers can be used for any process with a measurable output and a known ideal output,
but controllers are used mainly for regulating temperature, pressure, force, flow rate, feed rate, speed and more.

### Bibliography

> {% references %} {% endreferences %}

Reviewer: Move this to after the example code

> ## The Algorithm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Putting it all together
```

#Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller

You are a helmsmen keeping a vessel on course in various conditions, how do you do that.

> A common way is to steer based on current course error, past error and the current rate of change.

Reviewer 2: If you're going for an analogy, I would love to see this sentence expanded to a paragraph. Something like: you are aiming towards the lighthouse, but you are 4 degrees to the left, that is your current error and you need to correct that. You're been zig zagging left and right for the past 10 minutes, you should fix that too. You also notice that steering has become hard and harder, maybe you've hit a new current? Taking all this information into account, you can correct your course to have a smooth trip, just like you father taught you, just like his father taught him.

Now, the proportional-integral-derivative controller (PID controller) works like the helmsmen on a ship.

The PID controller is a control loop feedback mechanism, used for continuously modulated control.
The PID controller is in three parts proportional controller, integral controller, and derivative controller.

Before we get into how a PID controller works, we need a good example to use to explain how it work.
Imagine you are making a self driving rc car that drives on a line.

If the car is too far to the right then you would turn left and visa versa.
Since there is a range of angles you can turn the wheel, you can turn with proportion to how far you are from the line.
This is what the proportional controller (P controller) does, which is given by,

$$ P = K_{p} e(t), $$

Where $K_{p}$ is a constant and $e(t)$ is the current error.
The performance of the controller improves with larger $K_{p}$;

> if $K_{p}$ is too high then when the error is too high, the system becomes unstable, i.e. the rc car drives in a circle.

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it zig zag out of control?

$$ D = K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt}$$

Where $K_{d}$ is a constant.
If $K_{d}$ is too high then the system is overdamped, i.e. the car takes too long to get back on track.
If it's too low the system is underdamped, i.e. the car oscillates around the line.
When the car is getting back on track quickly with little to no oscillations then the system is called critically damped.

I looks like we are done, we start driving but then some wind starts pushing the car and we have a constant error.
We need to know if we are spending too long on one side and account for that.
The way to do that is to sum up all the errors and multiply it by a constant.
This is what the integral controller (I controller) does, which is given by,

$$ I = K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(x) dx, $$

Where $K_{i}$ is a constant.
The peformance of the controller is better with higher $K_{i}$; but with higher $K_{i}$ it can introduce oscillations.

The PID constroller is just a sum of all there three constrollers, of the form,

$$ U = K_{p} e(t) + K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(x) dx + K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt} $$

To use a PID controller, you need to tune it, by setting the constants, $K_{p}$, $K_{i}$, and $K_{d}$.

> There are multiple methods of tuning like, manual tuning, Ziegler–Nichols, Tyreus Luyben, and more.

Reviewer 2: I'd love to see one of those method expanded later, I've tried to make a PID controlled segway-type device using an arduino once, but I could never quite get the constants right manually.

> The uses of PID controllers are thoreticaly any process which has mesurable output and a known ideal output,

Reviewer 2: thoreticaly => theoretically

but controllers are used mainly for regulating temperature, pressure, force, flow rate, feed rate, speed, and more.

## The Algorithm

> Luckily the algorithm is very simple, You just need to make the PID equation decrete.

Reviewer 2: decrete  => discrete

#Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller

The proportional-integral-derivative controller (PID controller) is a control loop feedback mechanism, used for continuously modulated control.
The PID controller is in three parts proportional controller, integral controller, and derivative controller.

Before we get into how a PID controller works, we need a good example to use to explain how it work.
Imagine you are making a self driving rc car that drives on a line, how wuld make it work given that the car moves with a constent speed.

### Proportional Controller

If the car is too far to the right then you would turn left and visa versa.
Since there is a range of angles you can turn the wheel, you can turn with proportion to how far you are from the line.
This is what the proportional controller (P controller) does, which is given by,

$$ P = K_{p} e(t), $$

Where $K_{p}$ is a constant and $e(t)$ is the current error.
The performance of the controller improves with larger $K_{p}$;
if $K_{p}$ is too high then when the error is too high, the system becomes unstable, i.e. the rc car drives in a circle.

### Derivative Controller

> The P controller works well but it has the added problem of overshoting a lot.

Reviewer 3: overshoting -> overshooting

Author: I prefer it here.

> we need to dampen the oscillation, on way to solve this is to make the rc car resistant to sudden changes of error.

Reviewer 3: we -> We.
on -> one

I would split the sentences instead of using the comma

> This is what the derivative controller (D controller) does, which is given by,

Reviewer 3: The controller is not "given" by the formula. The behavior of the controller is _described_ by the formula. The same problem is present in the P and I parts as well.

$$ D = K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt}$$

Where $K_{d}$ is a constant.
If $K_{d}$ is too high then the system is overdamped, i.e. the car takes too long to get back on track.
If it's too low the system is underdamped, i.e. the car oscillates around the line.
When the car is getting back on track quickly with little to no oscillations then the system is called critically damped.

### Integral Controller

> I looks like we are done, we start driving but if some wind starts pushing the car then we get a constant error.

Reviewer 3: I -> It

Reviewer: Maybe something like:

> The Proportional and Derivative controllers are enough to robustly control our system, but if some wind starts pushing the car while we are driving, then we will get a constant error.

We need to know if we are spending too long on one side and account for that.
The way to do that is to sum up all the errors and multiply it by a constant.
This is what the integral controller (I controller) does, which is given by,

$$ I = K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(x) dx, $$

Where $K_{i}$ is a constant.
The peformance of the controller is better with higher $K_{i}$; but with higher $K_{i}$ it can introduce oscillations.

### Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller

The PID controller is just a sum of all there three constrollers, of the form,

$$ U = K_{p} e(t) + K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(x) dx + K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt} $$

> To use a PID controller, you need to tune it, by setting the constants, $K_{p}$, $K_{i}$, and $K_{d}$.

Reviewer 3: tune it, -> tune it (it doesn't need the comma)

There are multiple methods of tuning like, manual tuning, Ziegler–Nichols, Tyreus Luyben, and more.

> The uses of PID controllers are theoretically any process which has mesurable output and a known ideal output,

Reviewer 3: mesurable -> measurable

> but controllers are used mainly for regulating temperature, pressure, force, flow rate, feed rate, speed, and more.

Reviewer 3: speed, and more -> speed and more

## The Algorithm

> Luckily the algorithm is very simple, You just need to make the PID equation discrete.

Reviewer 3: You -> you

> Thus, the equation looks like this,

Reviewer 3: this, -> this:

#Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller

The proportional-integral-derivative controller (PID controller) is a control loop feedback mechanism, used for continuously modulated control.
The PID controller is comprised of three parts: proportional controller, integral controller, and derivative controller.

Before we get into how a PID controller works, we need a good example to explain things.
Imagine you are making a self-driving RC car that drives on a line, how would make it work given that the car moves with a constant speed.

### Proportional Controller

If the car is too far to the right then you would turn left and vice versa.
But there are a range of angles you can turn the wheel, so you can turn proportional to how far you are from the line.

> This is what the proportional controller (P controller) does, which is given by,

Author: It's not grammatically incorrect. What would you change it to?

$$ P = K_{p} e(t), $$

> Where $K_{p}$ is a constant and $e(t)$ is the current error.

Reviewer 4: $$e(t)$$ is canonically defined as $$setpoint(t) − measured_value(t)$$

The performance of the controller improves with larger $K_{p}$;
if $K_{p}$ is too high then when the error is too high, the system becomes unstable, i.e. the rc car drives in a circle.

### Derivative Controller

The P controller works well but it has the added problem of overshoting a lot.
we need to dampen the oscillation, on way to solve this is to make the rc car resistant to sudden changes of error.
This is what the derivative controller (D controller) does, which is given by,

> $$ D = K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt}$$

Author: It is a derivative.

Where $K_{d}$ is a constant.
If $K_{d}$ is too high then the system is overdamped, i.e. the car takes too long to get back on track.
If it's too low the system is underdamped, i.e. the car oscillates around the line.
When the car is getting back on track quickly with little to no oscillations then the system is called critically damped.

### Integral Controller

I looks like we are done, we start driving but if some wind starts pushing the car then we get a constant error.

> We need to know if we are spending too long on one side and account for that.

Reviewer: > To correct this error, we need...

The way to do that is to sum up all the errors and multiply it by a constant.
This is what the integral controller (I controller) does, which is given by,

> $$ I = K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(x) dx, $$

Reviewer: is this a different `e`? Its dependent on position instead of time. Maybe it would be nice to create three separate errors `e_P`, `e_D` and `e_I` so we can differentiate?

Also, is the integral going from 0 -> t but in terms of `dx`?

Where $K_{i}$ is a constant.
The peformance of the controller is better with higher $K_{i}$; but with higher $K_{i}$ it can introduce oscillations.

### Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller

> The PID controller is just a sum of all there three constrollers, of the form,

Reviewer: > The PID controller is just a sum of all three controllers and is of the form,

$$ U = K_{p} e(t) + K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(x) dx + K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt} $$

To use a PID controller, you need to tune it by setting the constants, $K_{p}$, $K_{i}$, and $K_{d}$.
If you choose the parameters for your PID controller incorrectly, the output will be unstable, i.e., the output diverges.

> There are multiple methods of tuning like, manual tuning, Ziegler–Nichols, Tyreus Luyben, Cohen–Coon, and Åström-Hägglund.

Reviewer: Will these be covered? If so, leave a note.

Reviewer: Hmm, then for completeness we might want to differentiate these.

Reviewer: If these are mentioned, they should be described. You can add a simple list with all of them and how they are differentiated from each other.

It might be worth adding a separate heading for tuning and discussing these in-turn.

Author: Why not link to the wiki page https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller#Overview_of_tuning_methods

Author: Cool, Thanks.

> The uses of PID controllers are theoretically any process which has measurable output and a known ideal output,

Reviewer: > theoretically, PID controllers can be used for any process with a measurable output and a known ideal output,

# Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a "written by Gathros" here (or whatever name you want to put down). After the discussion today, I think it makes sense to differentiate who wrote what.

The Proportional-Integral-Derivative controller (PID controller) is a control loop feedback mechanism, used for continuously modulated control.
The PID controller is comprised of three parts: proportional controller, integral controller, and derivative controller.

Before we get into how a PID controller works, we need a good example to explain things.

> Imagine you are making a self-driving RC car that drives on a line, how would make it work given that the car moves with a constant speed.

Reviewer: What do you mean "how would make it work"? Do you mean: "how would we keep the car on the line"?

Author: Yeah, that's what I mean.

Reviewer: I meant this as a fix. The sentence doesn't currently make sense.

Imagine you are making a self-driving RC car that drives on a line, how would make the car stay on track given that it moves with a constant speed.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a sentence here like:
> This could be done with a PID controller, which is a combination of Proportional, Integral, and Derivative (PID) controllers.

Author: I prefer introducing it over time, to make it easier to follow.

Reviewer: My argument was that it was not followable without a transitional sentence.

### Proportional Controller

> If the car is too far to the right then you should turn left and vice versa.

Reviewer: I think sticking to "we" instead of "you" makes sense, but that's personal preference. Maybe something like:
> Imagine our RC car is moving too far to the right, in this case it makes sense to turn left.

> Since there are a range of angles you can turn the wheel, so you should turn proportional to the distance from the line.

Reviewer: Since there are a range of angles you can turn the wheel, ~so~ you should turn proportional to the distance from the line.

This is what the proportional controller (P controller) does, which is described by,

$$ P = K_{p} e(t), $$

Where $K_{p}$ is a constant and $e(t)$ is the current distance from the line, which is called the error.
The performance of the controller improves with larger $K_{p}$;
if $K_{p}$ is too high then when the error is too high, the system becomes unstable.

> In this case, the car would turn in circles, since there is a maximum angle the wheel can turn, else it would zig zag around the line.

Reviewer: This sentence feels weird. Maybe:
> In this case, the car would turn in circles because there is a maximum angle the wheel can turn, otherwise it would zig zag around the line.

In this example, the car would turn in circles, since there is a maximum angle the wheel can turn, else it would zig zag around the line.

### Derivative Controller

> The P controller works well but it has the added problem of overshooting a lot, we need to dampen these oscillations.

Reviewer: Does the P controller really provide an oscillation? It seems like just an overshooting, right? If that's the case, it makes more sense to say "dampen this motion" then "dampen these oscillations"

Author: P controllers may over shoot then it will start to oscillate around the track. So you're dampening this oscillation not the motion of the car.

This is what the derivative controller (D controller) does, which is described by,

$$ D = K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt}$$

Where $K_{d}$ is a constant.
If $K_{d}$ is too high then the system is overdamped, i.e. the car takes too long to get back on track.
If it's too low the system is underdamped, i.e. the car oscillates around the line.

> When the car is getting back on track quickly with little to no oscillations then the system is called critically damped.

Reviewer: >When the car returns to the track quickly...

### Integral Controller

The Proportional and Derivative controllers are robust enough to get the on course.

> We start driving, but then some wind starts pushing the car which introduces a constant error.

Reviewer: Maybe combine these two sentences?
> The Proportional and Derivative controllers are robust enough to get the on course, but what if some wind starts pushing the car and introduces a constant error?

We need to know if we are spending too long on one side and account for that.

> The way to do that is to sum up all the errors and multiply it by a constant.

Reviewer: Maybe
>Well, we would need to know if we are spending too long on one side and account for that, and we can figure that out by summing up all the errors and multiply it by a constant.

> Well, we would need to know if we are spending too long on one side and account for it, we can figure it out by summing up all the errors and multiply it by a constant.

Reviewer: > Well, we would need to know if we are spending too long on one side *to* account for it, *and* we can figure it out by summing up all the errors and multiply it by a constant.

### Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller

The PID controller is just a sum of all three controllers and is of the form,

$$ U = K_{p} e(t) + K_{i} \int_{0}^{t} e(x) dx + K_{d} \frac{de(t)}{dt} $$

To use a PID controller, you need to tune it by setting the constants, $K_{p}$, $K_{i}$, and $K_{d}$.
If you choose the parameters for your PID controller incorrectly, the output will be unstable, i.e., the output diverges.
There are multiple methods of tuning like, manual tuning, Ziegler–Nichols, Tyreus Luyben, Cohen–Coon, and Åström-Hägglund.

Theoretically, PID controllers can be used for any process with a measurable output and a known ideal output,
but controllers are used mainly for regulating temperature, pressure, force, flow rate, feed rate, speed and more.

## The Algorithm

Luckily the algorithm is very simple, you just need to make the PID equation discrete.
Thus, the equation looks like this:

$$ U = K_{p} e(t_{j}) + \sum_{l=0}^{j} K_{i} e(t_{l}) \Delta t + K_{d} \frac{e(t_{j-1}) - e(t_{j})}{\Delta t}. $$

In the end the code looks like this:

{% method %}
{% sample lang="c" %}
[import:26-34, lang:"c_cpp"](code/c/pid_controller.c)
{% endmethod %}

## Example Code

> This example is not calculating the time elapsed, instead it is setting a value called dt.

Reviewer: It is not clear from the code what this example is supposed to output or do, in general. 

I just need a clear description of what this example code is trying to do. I am having a little trouble figuring out what the code is supposed to be doing, but I think it's a 1D analog to the car example, right? We are trying to keep the car on `setpoint`?

> The example code is of a 1-dimensional RC car that is trying to change from the first lane to the second lane, where the numbers represent the center of the lane.

Reviewer: I need some more information here or in the code because it's unclear. What does `setpoint` mean? "where the numbers represent the center of the lane" is really vague. What does that mean?

Author: I don't know what you want me to write there, I can't make it more clear.

> This example is we can't calculate the time elapsed, instead we are setting a value called dt for time elapsed.

Reviewer: This sentence is unclear. Did you mean:
>In this example, we can't calculate the time elapsed, so we are instead setting a value called `dt` for time elapsed.

In this case, why are we using `dt` instead of `time` or some other parameter? `dt` always describes the size of a timestep, not the time, itself.

If the normal case is to calculate time, as indicated in line 10 of the code, why do we provide an example that doesn't do this? What is the point in the time parameter to begin with? Is it for dynamic timestepping?

Author: The I and D controllers use the time parameter for calculating integration and differentiation.
